---
ID: 1140
post_title: 'Statistical Support for Monitoring &#038; Evaluation'
author: Maya Alvorado
post_date: 2017-03-17 10:25:41
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: >
  https://dev.stats4sd.org/homepage/what-we-do/statistical-support-for-monitoring-evaluation/
published: true
U_S_C_message:
  - 'a:1:{i:0;s:0:"";}'
tags: [ ]
categories: [ ]
---
[et_pb_section bb_built="1" admin_label="section" transparent_background="on" allow_player_pause="off" inner_shadow="off" parallax="off" parallax_method="on" make_fullwidth="off" use_custom_width="off" width_unit="on" custom_width_px="1080" custom_width_percent="80" make_equal="off" use_custom_gutter="off"][et_pb_row admin_label="Row" make_fullwidth="off" use_custom_width="off" width_unit="on" custom_width_px="1080" custom_width_percent="80" use_custom_gutter="off" allow_player_pause="off" parallax="off" parallax_method="on" make_equal="off" parallax_1="off" parallax_method_1="off" parallax_2="off" parallax_method_2="off"][et_pb_column type="1_2"][et_pb_image admin_label="Image" src="https://dev.stats4sd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/somalia-2.jpg" show_in_lightbox="off" url_new_window="off" use_overlay="off" animation="off" sticky="off" align="left" force_fullwidth="off" always_center_on_mobile="on" use_border_color="off" border_color="#ffffff" border_width="1" border_style="solid" custom_margin="30px|50px|30px|50px"] [/et_pb_image][et_pb_image admin_label="Image" src="https://dev.stats4sd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/somalia-1.jpg" show_in_lightbox="off" url_new_window="off" use_overlay="off" animation="off" sticky="off" align="left" force_fullwidth="off" always_center_on_mobile="on" use_border_color="off" border_color="#ffffff" border_width="1" border_style="solid" custom_margin="|50px|30px|50px"] [/et_pb_image][et_pb_image admin_label="Image" src="https://dev.stats4sd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/somalia-3.jpg" show_in_lightbox="off" url_new_window="off" use_overlay="off" animation="off" sticky="off" align="left" force_fullwidth="off" always_center_on_mobile="on" use_border_color="off" border_color="#ffffff" border_width="1" border_style="solid" custom_margin="|50px|30px|50px"] [/et_pb_image][/et_pb_column][et_pb_column type="1_2"][et_pb_text admin_label="Text" background_layout="light" text_orientation="left" header_font_size="30" header_letter_spacing="0" header_line_height="1" text_letter_spacing="0" text_line_height="1.7" use_border_color="off" border_color="#ffffff" border_width="1" border_style="solid" custom_padding="40px|||"]

#### **Monitoring and Evaluation for the DFID Somalia Humanitarian Programme**

####  

##### The Context: SSD provides long-term support for humanitarian aid work in Somalia, funded through Transtec and the Norweigen Refugee council (via the BRCiS Consortium). Somalia is a challenging environment to conduct M&E activities. It is a dynamic environment with a high mobility of households, nomadic communities and internally displaced persons. There is also a high risk of household and community-level shocks that can dramatically affect livelihoods. Much of the work of these projects is to reduce the risks presented by these shocks. In this environment, things don’t go according to plan. Last-minute changes occur and the humanitarian activities that go ahead need to be flexible. It is vital for organisations working in these environments to get reliable answers to the questions that M&E aim to answer:

*   What actually happened?
*   How effective was it?

####  

##### What did we do? SSD has considerable experience in working in these challenging environments, and we have supported the work of Transtec and BRCiS throughout the M&E process, from the design of data collection instruments through to the analysis and reporting of outcomes. Evaluation of Humanitarian Interventions: We supported four panel surveys for over two years across Somalia covering intervention and counterfactual communities. These were designed to measure the effects of the humanitarian interventions being conducted. Challenges in data collection and analysis included the tracking of households over several survey rounds, high attrition rates and complicated intervention-effect attribution due to a dynamic and complex system. SSD provided a combination of a “classic” evaluation, comparing the intervention group with the control group, along with real-time monitoring of the data-collection process. Real-time Data for BRCiS Projects: We are also working with the BRCiS Consortium to help manage their data and generate information products for the NGOs. The Statistical Services Centre (University of Reading) worked closely with BRCiS to develop an integrated data management system for all their activities. During Autumn 2016, SSD expanded on this work by creating a centralised “Managers’ Tool” – providing a central location for teams to review and update information about the activities within BRCiS projects. It is often the case in M&E that a large collection of isolated studies is conducted, offering limited insights and often too late to be useful. Using web automations, efficient data collection tools and powerful server-side analysis tools, SSD can give useful information to the right people at the right time. Ultimately, we can start to change the question from “What happened?” to “What is happening?” We are happy to offer this support to others. Please contact us.   [/et_pb_text][et_pb_button admin_label="Button" url_new_window="off" button_text="For more on BRCiS" button_alignment="left" background_layout="light" custom_button="on" button_letter_spacing="0" button_use_icon="default" button_icon_placement="right" button_on_hover="on" button_letter_spacing_hover="0" button_text_color="#ffffff" button_bg_color="#5e5e5e" button_border_width="0" button_border_radius="0" button_font="Open Sans|on|||" button_text_size="17" saved_tabs="all"] [/et_pb_button][/et_pb_column][/et_pb_row][/et_pb_section]